########## LEVITICUS 13 ##########
EN title: That's a Nasty Rash! Skin Problems 101
KO title: 피부병 판별법 101
MSG units: ['1-3', '4-8', '9-17', '18-23', '24-28', '29-37', '38-39', '40-44', '45-46', '47-58', '59']
EN badges: ['1-2', '3-4', '5-11', '12-19', '20-25', '26-32', '33-41', '42', '43-46', '47-48', '49-57', '58-59']
KO badges: ['1-2', '3-4', '5-11', '12-19', '20-25', '26-32', '33-41', '42', '43-46', '47-48', '49-57', '58-59']
==============================================================================================================

----- EN para 0 [1-2] -----
[MSG 1-3] God spoke to Moses and Aaron: "When someone has a swelling or a blister or a shiny spot on the skin that might signal a serious skin disease on the body, bring him to Aaron the priest or to one of his priest sons. The priest will examine the sore on the skin. If the hair in the sore has turned white and the sore appears more than skin deep, it is a serious skin disease and infectious. After the priest has examined it, he will pronounce the person unclean.
[EN] God hit up Moses and Aaron and said, “Alright, listen up. If someone gets a weird swelling, blister, or a shiny spot on their skin that looks like it could be a serious infection, you gotta bring them to Aaron the priest or one of his sons.
[KO 1-2] 하나님이 모세랑 아론한테 말씀하셨대. “야, 누가 피부에 막 뭐가 붓거나 물집이 잡히거나 반질반질한 점 같은 게 생겼는데, 이게 좀 심각한 피부병 같다 싶으면, 아론 제사장이나 그 아들 제사장 중 한 명한테 데려가야 돼.

----- EN para 1 [3-4] -----
[MSG 1-3] God spoke to Moses and Aaron: "When someone has a swelling or a blister or a shiny spot on the skin that might signal a serious skin disease on the body, bring him to Aaron the priest or to one of his priest sons. The priest will examine the sore on the skin. If the hair in the sore has turned white and the sore appears more than skin deep, it is a serious skin disease and infectious. After the priest has examined it, he will pronounce the person unclean.
  !! numbers possibly missing in EN: ['one']
[MSG 4-8] "If the shiny spot on the skin is white but appears to be only on the surface and the hair has not turned white, the priest will quarantine the person for seven days. On the seventh day the priest will examine it again; if, in his judgment, the sore is the same and has not spread, the priest will keep him in quarantine for another seven days. On the seventh day the priest will examine him a second time; if the sore has faded and hasn't spread, the priest will declare him clean—it is a harmless rash. The person can go home and wash his clothes; he is clean. But if the sore spreads after he has shown himself to the priest and been declared clean, he must come back again to the priest who will conduct another examination. If the sore has spread, the priest will pronounce him unclean—it is a serious skin disease and infectious.
  !! numbers possibly missing in EN: ['seven', 'seventh']
[EN] The priest will check out the sore. If the hair in the sore has turned white and it looks like it's deeper than just the skin, that’s a serious, contagious skin disease. After the priest checks it, he’s gotta declare that person ‘unclean.’
[KO 3-4] 제사장이 피부에 난 상처를 볼 거임. 근데 그 상처에 난 털이 하얗게 변하고 상처가 피부보다 더 깊어 보이면, 이건 진짜 심각하고 전염되는 피부병인 거임. 제사장이 딱 보고 나서 그 사람 부정하다고 선언할 거야.

----- EN para 2 [5-11] -----
[MSG 4-8] "If the shiny spot on the skin is white but appears to be only on the surface and the hair has not turned white, the priest will quarantine the person for seven days. On the seventh day the priest will examine it again; if, in his judgment, the sore is the same and has not spread, the priest will keep him in quarantine for another seven days. On the seventh day the priest will examine him a second time; if the sore has faded and hasn't spread, the priest will declare him clean—it is a harmless rash. The person can go home and wash his clothes; he is clean. But if the sore spreads after he has shown himself to the priest and been declared clean, he must come back again to the priest who will conduct another examination. If the sore has spread, the priest will pronounce him unclean—it is a serious skin disease and infectious.
[MSG 9-17] "Whenever someone has a serious and infectious skin disease, you must bring him to the priest. The priest will examine him; if there is a white swelling in the skin, the hair is turning white, and there is an open sore in the swelling, it is a chronic skin disease. The priest will pronounce him unclean. But he doesn't need to quarantine him because he's already given his diagnosis of unclean. If a serious disease breaks out that covers all the skin from head to foot, wherever the priest looks, the priest will make a thorough examination; if the disease covers his entire body, he will pronounce the person with the sore clean—since it has turned all white, he is clean. But if they are open, running sores, he is unclean. The priest will examine the open sores and pronounce him unclean. The open sores are unclean; they are evidence of a serious skin disease. But if the open sores dry up and turn white, he is to come back to the priest who will reexamine him; if the sores have turned white, the priest will pronounce the person with the sores clean. He is clean.
[EN] But if the shiny spot is white but just on the surface, and the hair hasn't turned white, the priest will put the person in quarantine for a week. On day seven, the priest checks again. If he thinks the sore is the same and hasn't spread, he'll keep them in quarantine for another seven days. Then, on that seventh day, he’ll check them one more time. If the sore has faded and hasn't spread, the priest will say they're 'clean'—it's just a minor rash. The person can go home, wash their clothes, and they're good to go. But, plot twist, if the rash starts spreading *after* they've been declared clean, they have to go back to the priest. He'll check it again, and if it has spread, he'll have to say they're 'unclean' because it's a serious, contagious infection.
[KO 5-11] 근데 만약 피부에 반질반질한 점이 하얗긴 한데 피부 표면에만 있는 것 같고 털은 안 하얘졌으면, 제사장이 그 사람을 7일 동안 격리시킬 거래. 7일째 되는 날 제사장이 다시 볼 건데, 만약 제사장이 보기에 상처가 그대로고 번지지 않았으면, 또 7일을 더 격리시키는 거임. 그리고 그 7일째 되는 날 제사장이 두 번째로 검사할 건데, 만약 상처가 흐려지고 번지지 않았으면, 제사장이 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래. 그냥 별거 아닌 발진인 거지. 그 사람은 집에 가서 옷 빨아 입으면 깨끗해지는 거임. 근데 만약 제사장한테 보여주고 깨끗하다고 선언받은 뒤에 상처가 번지면, 다시 제사장한테 와야 된대. 제사장이 또 검사할 건데, 만약 상처가 번졌으면 제사장은 그를 부정하다고 선언할 거야. 이건 심각한 피부병이고 전염성이 있는 거니까.

----- EN para 3 [12-19] -----
[MSG 9-17] "Whenever someone has a serious and infectious skin disease, you must bring him to the priest. The priest will examine him; if there is a white swelling in the skin, the hair is turning white, and there is an open sore in the swelling, it is a chronic skin disease. The priest will pronounce him unclean. But he doesn't need to quarantine him because he's already given his diagnosis of unclean. If a serious disease breaks out that covers all the skin from head to foot, wherever the priest looks, the priest will make a thorough examination; if the disease covers his entire body, he will pronounce the person with the sore clean—since it has turned all white, he is clean. But if they are open, running sores, he is unclean. The priest will examine the open sores and pronounce him unclean. The open sores are unclean; they are evidence of a serious skin disease. But if the open sores dry up and turn white, he is to come back to the priest who will reexamine him; if the sores have turned white, the priest will pronounce the person with the sores clean. He is clean.
[MSG 18-23] "When a person has a boil and it heals and in place of the boil there is white swelling or a reddish-white shiny spot, the person must present himself to the priest for an examination. If it looks like it has penetrated the skin and the hair in it has turned white, the priest will pronounce him unclean. It is a serious skin disease that has broken out in the boil. But if the examination shows that there is no white hair in it and it is only skin deep and has faded, the priest will put him in quarantine for seven days. If it then spreads over the skin, the priest will diagnose him as unclean. It is infectious. But if the shiny spot has not changed and hasn't spread, it's only a scar from the boil. The priest will pronounce him clean.
  !! numbers possibly missing in EN: ['seven']
[EN] Whenever someone has a gnarly, infectious skin thing, you have to bring them to the priest. The priest will check them out. If there's a white swelling, the hair is turning white, and there's an open sore in the middle of it, it's a chronic skin disease. The priest will just straight up declare them 'unclean.' No need for quarantine this time because it's already obvious. But if the disease breaks out and covers their whole body, from head to toe, the priest will do a full check. If the disease covers the entire body, he'll actually declare the person 'clean.' Since it's all turned white, they're clean. But if there are open, oozy sores, they're unclean. The priest will see the open sores and declare them unclean. Those open sores are the proof of a serious skin disease. However, if the open sores dry up and turn white, the person has to go back to the priest. He'll re-examine them, and if the sores have turned white, the priest will pronounce them 'clean.' They're clean.
[KO 12-19] 누구든지 심각하고 전염성 있는 피부병에 걸리면, 제사장한테 데려와야 한대. 제사장이 그를 검사할 건데, 만약 피부에 하얀 종기가 있고, 털이 하얗게 변하고, 그 종기 안에 상처가 터져있으면, 이건 만성 피부병인 거임. 제사장은 그를 부정하다고 선언할 거래. 근데 이미 부정하다고 진단 내렸으니까 굳이 격리할 필요는 없대. 만약 심각한 병이 터져서 머리부터 발끝까지 온 피부를 덮어버리면, 제사장이 샅샅이 검사할 건데, 만약 병이 온몸을 덮었으면, 그는 그 상처 입은 사람을 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래. 왜냐면 몸이 다 하얗게 변했으니까 깨끗하다는 거임. 근데 만약 상처가 터져서 진물이 흐르면, 그는 부정한 거래. 제사장이 그 터진 상처를 보고 부정하다고 선언할 거야. 터진 상처는 부정한 거고, 심각한 피부병의 증거인 거지. 근데 만약 터진 상처가 마르고 하얗게 변하면, 그는 다시 제사장한테 와야 된대. 제사장이 다시 검사할 건데, 만약 상처가 하얗게 변했으면, 제사장은 그 상처 입은 사람을 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래. 그는 깨끗한 거임.

----- EN para 4 [20-25] -----
[MSG 18-23] "When a person has a boil and it heals and in place of the boil there is white swelling or a reddish-white shiny spot, the person must present himself to the priest for an examination. If it looks like it has penetrated the skin and the hair in it has turned white, the priest will pronounce him unclean. It is a serious skin disease that has broken out in the boil. But if the examination shows that there is no white hair in it and it is only skin deep and has faded, the priest will put him in quarantine for seven days. If it then spreads over the skin, the priest will diagnose him as unclean. It is infectious. But if the shiny spot has not changed and hasn't spread, it's only a scar from the boil. The priest will pronounce him clean.
[MSG 24-28] "When a person has a burn on his skin and the raw flesh turns into a reddish-white or white shiny spot, the priest is to examine it. If the hair has turned white in the shiny spot and it looks like it's more than skin deep, a serious skin disease has erupted in the area of the burn. The priest will pronounce him unclean; it is a serious skin disease and infectious. But if on examination there is no white hair in the shiny spot and it doesn't look to be more than skin deep but has faded, the priest will put him in quarantine for seven days. On the seventh day the priest will reexamine him. If by then it has spread over the skin, the priest will diagnose him as unclean; it is a serious skin disease and infectious. If by that time the shiny spot has stayed the same and has not spread but has faded, it is only a swelling from the burn. The priest will pronounce him clean; it's only a scar from the burn.
[EN] If someone has a boil that heals, but then a white swelling or a reddish-white shiny spot shows up where the boil was, they have to go show the priest. He'll check it out. If it looks like it's gone deep into the skin and the hair in it has turned white, the priest will declare them 'unclean.' It's a serious skin disease that broke out from the boil. But if the check-up shows no white hair, it's only skin-deep, and it has faded, the priest will quarantine them for seven days. If it spreads during that week, the priest will diagnose them as 'unclean.' It's infectious. But if the shiny spot stays the same and doesn't spread, it's just a scar from the boil. The priest will say they're 'clean.'
[KO 20-25] 어떤 사람이 종기가 났다가 나았는데, 그 자리에 하얀 종기나 붉으스름한 흰색 반점이 생기면, 그 사람은 제사장한테 가서 검사를 받아야 한대. 만약 그게 피부 속까지 파고든 것 같고 그 안의 털이 하얗게 변했으면, 제사장은 그를 부정하다고 선언할 거래. 이건 종기에서 터져 나온 심각한 피부병인 거임. 근데 검사해봤더니 흰 털이 없고 피부 표면에만 있고 흐려졌으면, 제사장은 그를 7일 동안 격리시킬 거래. 만약 그동안 그게 피부에 번지면, 제사장은 그를 부정하다고 진단할 거야. 전염성이 있는 거지. 근데 만약 반점이 그대로고 번지지 않았으면, 그건 그냥 종기 흉터인 거임. 제사장은 그를 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래.

----- EN para 5 [26-32] -----
[MSG 24-28] "When a person has a burn on his skin and the raw flesh turns into a reddish-white or white shiny spot, the priest is to examine it. If the hair has turned white in the shiny spot and it looks like it's more than skin deep, a serious skin disease has erupted in the area of the burn. The priest will pronounce him unclean; it is a serious skin disease and infectious. But if on examination there is no white hair in the shiny spot and it doesn't look to be more than skin deep but has faded, the priest will put him in quarantine for seven days. On the seventh day the priest will reexamine him. If by then it has spread over the skin, the priest will diagnose him as unclean; it is a serious skin disease and infectious. If by that time the shiny spot has stayed the same and has not spread but has faded, it is only a swelling from the burn. The priest will pronounce him clean; it's only a scar from the burn.
[MSG 29-37] "If a man or woman develops a sore on the head or chin, the priest will offer a diagnosis. If it looks as if it is under the skin and the hair in it is yellow and thin, he will pronounce the person ritually unclean. It is an itch, an infectious skin disease. But if when he examines the itch, he finds it is only skin deep and there is no black hair in it, he will put the person in quarantine for seven days. On the seventh day he will reexamine the sore; if the itch has not spread, there is no yellow hair in it, and it looks as if the itch is only skin deep, the person must shave, except for the itch; the priest will send him back to quarantine for another seven days. If the itch has not spread, and looks to be only skin deep, the priest will pronounce him clean. The person can go home and wash his clothes; he is clean. But if the itch spreads after being pronounced clean, the priest must reexamine it; if the itch has spread in the skin, he doesn't have to look any farther, for yellow hair, for instance; he is unclean. But if he sees that the itch is unchanged and black hair has begun to grow in it, the itch is healed. The person is clean and the priest will pronounce him clean.
[EN] If someone gets a burn and the raw part turns into a reddish-white or white shiny spot, the priest has to check it. If the hair in the spot has turned white and it looks deeper than the skin, a serious skin disease has popped up in the burn area. The priest will declare them 'unclean'; it's a serious, contagious skin disease. But if the examination shows no white hair and it doesn't look too deep but has faded, the priest will quarantine them for seven days. On the seventh day, he'll check again. If it has spread by then, the priest will diagnose them as 'unclean'; it's a serious, contagious skin disease. If the shiny spot has stayed the same, hasn't spread, but has faded, it's just swelling from the burn. The priest will declare them 'clean'; it's just a burn scar.
[KO 26-32] 누가 피부에 화상을 입었는데, 그 생살이 붉으스름한 흰색이나 흰색 반점으로 변하면, 제사장이 그걸 검사해야 한대. 만약 반점의 털이 하얗게 변하고 피부보다 더 깊어 보이면, 화상 부위에 심각한 피부병이 생긴 거임. 제사장은 그를 부정하다고 선언할 거야. 이건 심각하고 전염성 있는 피부병인 거지. 근데 검사해봤더니 반점에 흰 털이 없고 피부보다 깊어 보이지도 않고 흐려졌으면, 제사장은 그를 7일 동안 격리시킬 거래. 7일째 되는 날 제사장이 다시 검사할 건데, 만약 그때까지 그게 피부에 번졌으면, 제사장은 그를 부정하다고 진단할 거야. 이건 심각하고 전염성 있는 피부병인 거지. 만약 그때까지 반점이 그대로고 번지지도 않고 흐려졌으면, 그건 그냥 화상으로 부은 거임. 제사장은 그를 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래. 그냥 화상 흉터인 거지.

----- EN para 6 [33-41] -----
[MSG 29-37] "If a man or woman develops a sore on the head or chin, the priest will offer a diagnosis. If it looks as if it is under the skin and the hair in it is yellow and thin, he will pronounce the person ritually unclean. It is an itch, an infectious skin disease. But if when he examines the itch, he finds it is only skin deep and there is no black hair in it, he will put the person in quarantine for seven days. On the seventh day he will reexamine the sore; if the itch has not spread, there is no yellow hair in it, and it looks as if the itch is only skin deep, the person must shave, except for the itch; the priest will send him back to quarantine for another seven days. If the itch has not spread, and looks to be only skin deep, the priest will pronounce him clean. The person can go home and wash his clothes; he is clean. But if the itch spreads after being pronounced clean, the priest must reexamine it; if the itch has spread in the skin, he doesn't have to look any farther, for yellow hair, for instance; he is unclean. But if he sees that the itch is unchanged and black hair has begun to grow in it, the itch is healed. The person is clean and the priest will pronounce him clean.
[MSG 38-39] "When a man or woman gets shiny or white shiny spots on the skin, the priest is to make an examination; if the shiny spots are dull white, it is only a rash that has broken out: The person is clean.
[MSG 40-44] "When a man loses his hair and goes bald, he is clean. If he loses his hair from his forehead, he is bald and he is clean. But if he has a reddish-white sore on scalp or forehead, it means a serious skin disease is breaking out. The priest is to examine it; if the swollen sore on his scalp or forehead is reddish-white like the appearance of the sore of a serious skin disease, he has a serious skin disease and is unclean. The priest has to pronounce him unclean because of the sore on his head.
[EN] If a man or woman gets a sore on their head or chin, the priest will check it out. If it looks like it's under the skin and the hair in it is thin and yellow, he'll pronounce them 'unclean.' It's an itchy, infectious skin disease. But if he checks the itch and finds it's only skin-deep with no black hair in it, he'll quarantine them for seven days. On the seventh day, he'll re-examine the sore. If the itch hasn't spread, there's no yellow hair, and it looks like it's just on the surface, the person has to shave, but not the itchy spot. The priest will send them back to quarantine for another week. If the itch still hasn't spread and seems only skin-deep, the priest will declare them 'clean.' They can go home, wash their clothes, and they're good. But if the itch spreads *after* being declared clean, the priest has to check it again. If it has spread, he doesn't even need to look for yellow hair; they're 'unclean.' But if he sees the itch is unchanged and black hair is growing back, the itch is healed. The person is clean, and the priest will say so.
[KO 33-41] 남자나 여자가 머리나 턱에 상처가 나면, 제사장이 진찰할 거래. 만약 그게 피부 아래에 있는 것 같고 그 안의 털이 노랗고 가늘면, 그는 그 사람을 부정하다고 선언할 거야. 이건 가려움증, 즉 전염성 피부병인 거임. 근데 가려움증을 검사해봤더니 피부 표면에만 있고 그 안에 검은 털이 없으면, 그는 그 사람을 7일 동안 격리시킬 거래. 7일째 되는 날 그는 상처를 다시 검사할 건데, 만약 가려움증이 번지지 않았고, 노란 털도 없고, 가려움증이 피부 표면에만 있는 것 같으면, 그 사람은 가려운 부분만 빼고 털을 밀어야 한대. 제사장은 그를 다시 7일 동안 격리 보낼 거야. 만약 가려움증이 번지지 않았고 피부 표면에만 있는 것 같으면, 제사장은 그를 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래. 그 사람은 집에 가서 옷 빨아 입으면 깨끗해지는 거임. 근데 깨끗하다고 선언받은 뒤에 가려움증이 번지면, 제사장이 다시 검사해야 한대. 만약 가려움증이 피부에 번졌으면, 굳이 노란 털 같은 거 더 찾아볼 필요도 없이 그는 부정한 거임. 근데 만약 그가 보기에 가려움증이 그대로고 검은 털이 자라기 시작했으면, 가려움증은 나은 거임. 그 사람은 깨끗하고 제사장은 그를 깨끗하다고 선언할 거래.

----- EN para 7 [42] -----
[MSG 40-44] "When a man loses his hair and goes bald, he is clean. If he loses his hair from his forehead, he is bald and he is clean. But if he has a reddish-white sore on scalp or forehead, it means a serious skin disease is breaking out. The priest is to examine it; if the swollen sore on his scalp or forehead is reddish-white like the appearance of the sore of a serious skin disease, he has a serious skin disease and is unclean. The priest has to pronounce him unclean because of the sore on his head.
[EN] When a man or woman gets shiny or white shiny spots on their skin, the priest is to check it out. If the spots are a dull white, it's just a rash. The person is clean.
[KO 42] 남자나 여자가 피부에 반질반질하거나 하얀 반점이 생기면, 제사장이 검사해야 한대. 만약 반점이 칙칙한 흰색이면, 그건 그냥 발진이 생긴 거임. 그 사람은 깨끗한 거래.

----- EN para 8 [43-46] -----
[MSG 40-44] "When a man loses his hair and goes bald, he is clean. If he loses his hair from his forehead, he is bald and he is clean. But if he has a reddish-white sore on scalp or forehead, it means a serious skin disease is breaking out. The priest is to examine it; if the swollen sore on his scalp or forehead is reddish-white like the appearance of the sore of a serious skin disease, he has a serious skin disease and is unclean. The priest has to pronounce him unclean because of the sore on his head.
[MSG 45-46] "Any person with a serious skin disease must wear torn clothes, leave his hair loose and unbrushed, cover his upper lip, and cry out, 'Unclean! Unclean!' As long as anyone has the sores, that one continues to be ritually unclean. That person must live alone; he or she must live outside the camp.
[EN] When a man starts losing his hair and goes bald, he's clean. If he loses hair from his forehead, he's just bald, and he's clean. But if he gets a reddish-white sore on his scalp or forehead, it means a serious skin disease is breaking out. The priest has to examine it. If the swollen sore is reddish-white and looks like a serious skin disease, then he has one and is 'unclean.' The priest has to declare him unclean because of the sore on his head.
[KO 43-46] 남자가 머리카락이 빠져서 대머리가 되면, 그는 깨끗한 거래. 이마부터 머리카락이 빠져도, 그는 대머리고 깨끗한 거임. 근데 만약 두피나 이마에 붉으스름한 흰색 상처가 있으면, 그건 심각한 피부병이 생기고 있다는 뜻이래. 제사장이 그걸 검사해야 한대. 만약 두피나 이마의 부은 상처가 붉으스름한 흰색이고 심각한 피부병의 상처 모양 같으면, 그는 심각한 피부병에 걸린 거고 부정한 거임. 제사장은 그의 머리에 난 상처 때문에 그를 부정하다고 선언해야 한대.

----- EN para 9 [47-48] -----
[MSG 47-58] "If clothing—woolen or linen clothing, woven or knitted cloth of linen or wool, leather or leatherwork—is infected with a patch of serious fungus and if the spot in the clothing or the leather or the woven or the knitted material or anything made of leather is greenish or rusty, that is a sign of serious fungus. Show it to the priest. The priest will examine the spot and then confiscate the material for seven days. On the seventh day he will reexamine the spot. If it has spread in the garment—the woven or knitted or leather material—it is the spot of a persistent serious fungus and the material is unclean. He must burn the garment. Because of the persistent and contaminating fungus, the material must be burned. But if when the priest examines it the spot has not spread in the garment, the priest will command the owner to wash the material that has the spot, and he will confiscate it for another seven days. He'll then make another examination after it has been washed; if the spot hasn't changed in appearance, even though it hasn't spread, it is still unclean. Burn it up, whether the fungus has affected the back or the front. If, when the priest makes his examination, the spot has faded after it has been washed, he is to tear the spot from the garment. But if it reappears, it is a fresh outbreak—throw whatever has the spot in the fire. If the garment is washed and the spot has go
   [...truncated]
  !! numbers possibly missing in EN: ['seven', 'seventh']
[EN] Anyone with a serious skin disease has to wear torn clothes, let their hair be a mess, cover their mouth, and yell, 'Unclean! Unclean!' As long as they have the sores, they're considered unclean. They have to live by themselves, outside the main camp.
[KO 47-48] 심각한 피부병에 걸린 사람은 옷을 찢어 입고, 머리는 풀어헤치고, 윗입술을 가리고, ‘부정하다! 부정하다!’라고 외쳐야 한대. 누구든지 상처가 있는 동안에는 계속해서 부정한 거임. 그 사람은 혼자 살아야 하고, 진영 밖에서 살아야 한대.

----- EN para 10 [49-57] -----
[MSG 47-58] "If clothing—woolen or linen clothing, woven or knitted cloth of linen or wool, leather or leatherwork—is infected with a patch of serious fungus and if the spot in the clothing or the leather or the woven or the knitted material or anything made of leather is greenish or rusty, that is a sign of serious fungus. Show it to the priest. The priest will examine the spot and then confiscate the material for seven days. On the seventh day he will reexamine the spot. If it has spread in the garment—the woven or knitted or leather material—it is the spot of a persistent serious fungus and the material is unclean. He must burn the garment. Because of the persistent and contaminating fungus, the material must be burned. But if when the priest examines it the spot has not spread in the garment, the priest will command the owner to wash the material that has the spot, and he will confiscate it for another seven days. He'll then make another examination after it has been washed; if the spot hasn't changed in appearance, even though it hasn't spread, it is still unclean. Burn it up, whether the fungus has affected the back or the front. If, when the priest makes his examination, the spot has faded after it has been washed, he is to tear the spot from the garment. But if it reappears, it is a fresh outbreak—throw whatever has the spot in the fire. If the garment is washed and the spot has go
   [...truncated]
[EN] Now for clothes. If clothing—wool or linen, woven or knitted, or even leather—gets a patch of serious fungus, and the spot is greenish or rusty, that's a bad sign. Show it to the priest. The priest will check the spot and then lock the item away for seven days. On the seventh day, he'll check it again. If the spot has spread, it's a persistent fungus, and the item is 'unclean.' He has to burn it. Because the fungus is persistent and contaminating, it has to be burned. But if the priest checks and the spot hasn't spread, he'll tell the owner to wash the item, and he'll lock it away for another seven days. He'll check it again after it's been washed. If the spot looks the same, even if it hasn't spread, it's still 'unclean.' Burn it, doesn't matter if the fungus is on the front or the back. If, when the priest checks, the spot has faded after washing, he is to tear that piece out of the garment. But if it shows up again, it's a fresh outbreak—throw whatever has the spot on it into the fire. If the garment is washed and the spot is gone, wash it a second time, and then it's 'clean.'
[KO 49-57] 이제 옷 얘기임. 만약 옷—양모나 아마포 옷, 리넨이나 양모로 짠 천이나 편물, 가죽이나 가죽 제품—이 심각한 곰팡이에 감염되고, 옷이나 가죽, 짠 천이나 편물, 또는 가죽으로 만든 어떤 것에 녹색이나 녹슨 색의 반점이 생기면, 그건 심각한 곰팡이의 신호래. 제사장한테 보여줘야 함. 제사장이 그 반점을 검사하고 나서 그 물건을 7일 동안 압수할 거래. 7일째 되는 날 그는 그 반점을 다시 검사할 건데, 만약 그게 옷—짠 천이나 편물, 가죽 제품—에 번졌으면, 그건 지독한 곰팡이 반점이고 그 물건은 부정한 거임. 그는 그 옷을 태워야 한대. 지독하고 오염시키는 곰팡이 때문에 그 물건은 태워야 하는 거임. 근데 만약 제사장이 검사했을 때 반점이 옷에 번지지 않았으면, 제사장은 주인에게 반점이 있는 부분을 빨라고 명령하고, 다시 7일 동안 압수할 거래. 그리고 빤 후에 다시 검사할 건데, 만약 반점 모양이 변하지 않았으면, 비록 번지지는 않았더라도 여전히 부정한 거임. 태워버려. 곰팡이가 뒷면에 있든 앞면에 있든 상관없음. 만약 제사장이 검사했을 때, 빤 후에 반점이 흐려졌으면, 그는 옷에서 그 반점 부분을 찢어내야 한대. 근데 만약 그게 다시 나타나면, 그건 새로 생긴 거니까—반점이 있는 건 뭐든지 불 속에 던져버려. 만약 옷을 빨았는데 반점이 사라졌으면, 한 번 더 빨면 깨끗해지는 거래.

----- EN para 11 [58-59] -----
[MSG 47-58] "If clothing—woolen or linen clothing, woven or knitted cloth of linen or wool, leather or leatherwork—is infected with a patch of serious fungus and if the spot in the clothing or the leather or the woven or the knitted material or anything made of leather is greenish or rusty, that is a sign of serious fungus. Show it to the priest. The priest will examine the spot and then confiscate the material for seven days. On the seventh day he will reexamine the spot. If it has spread in the garment—the woven or knitted or leather material—it is the spot of a persistent serious fungus and the material is unclean. He must burn the garment. Because of the persistent and contaminating fungus, the material must be burned. But if when the priest examines it the spot has not spread in the garment, the priest will command the owner to wash the material that has the spot, and he will confiscate it for another seven days. He'll then make another examination after it has been washed; if the spot hasn't changed in appearance, even though it hasn't spread, it is still unclean. Burn it up, whether the fungus has affected the back or the front. If, when the priest makes his examination, the spot has faded after it has been washed, he is to tear the spot from the garment. But if it reappears, it is a fresh outbreak—throw whatever has the spot in the fire. If the garment is washed and the spot has go
   [...truncated]
  !! numbers possibly missing in EN: ['seven', 'seventh']
[MSG 59] "These are the instructions regarding a spot of serious fungus in clothing of wool or linen, woven or knitted material, or any article of leather, for pronouncing them clean or unclean."
[EN] So yeah, those are the rules for dealing with fungus spots on clothes or leather, for deciding if they're 'clean' or 'unclean.'
[KO 58-59] 이게 바로 양모나 아마포 옷, 짠 천이나 편물, 또는 가죽 제품에 생긴 심각한 곰팡이 반점에 관한 지침인데, 그것들을 깨끗하다고 할지 부정하다고 할지 결정하는 법인 거임.
