===== CHAPTER 41: Pharaoh's Wild Dreams and Joseph's Big Break (37 EN, 37 KO, 24 MSG) =====
[EN0 None] § Pharaoh's Crazy Dreams
[EN1 1-4] So, like, two whole years went by, and Pharaoh had this wild dream. He was just chilling by the Nile River when, boom, seven super healthy-looking cows came right out of the water and started munching on the grass.
[EN2 3-4] But then, right after them, seven other cows that were basically just skin and bones came out of the river. They stood next to the healthy cows, and then—get this—the skinny cows straight up ate the seven healthy ones. Pharaoh woke up, totally weirded out.
[EN3 5-7] He fell back asleep and had another dream. This time, he saw seven ears of corn, all plump and perfect, growing on one stalk. Then, seven more ears grew, but these were all thin and dried up. And just like before, the thin, nasty ears of corn swallowed the healthy ones. Pharaoh woke up again like, "Whoa, another dream."
[EN4 None] § The Search for an Interpreter
[EN5 8] The next morning, Pharaoh was seriously bugged. He called all the magicians and wise guys in Egypt and told them his dreams, but nobody had a clue what they meant. They were all stumped.
[EN6 9-11] That's when the head cupbearer finally spoke up. "My bad, Pharaoh," he said. "I totally forgot to tell you something. A while back, you were mad at me and the head baker and threw us in jail. We both had these crazy dreams on the same night, and each dream meant something different.
[EN7 12-13] "There was this young Hebrew guy in there with us, a slave of the captain of the guard. We told him our dreams, and he explained them to us, like, perfectly. And everything happened exactly like he said it would. I got my job back, and the baker got... well, executed."
[EN8 None] § Joseph Gets Called Up
[EN9 14] Pharaoh was like, "Get me that guy, NOW!" So they rushed Joseph out of his prison cell. He got a haircut, changed into some clean clothes, and went to see the king.
[EN10 15] "I had a dream," Pharaoh told Joseph, "and no one can figure it out. But I heard that you can interpret dreams just by hearing them."
[EN11 16] "Nah, it's not me," Joseph said. "But God will give you the answer and put your mind at ease."
[EN12 None] § Pharaoh Spills the Tea
[EN13 17-21] So Pharaoh told Joseph the whole story. "In my dream, I was by the Nile, and seven healthy, fat cows came out and started grazing. Then seven more cows, super skinny and ugly—like, the ugliest I've ever seen in Egypt—came up after them. And the skinny cows ate the fat ones, but you couldn't even tell! They were still just as skinny and ugly as before. Then I woke up.
[EN14 22-24] "In my second dream, I saw seven full, healthy ears of grain on one stalk. Then seven more shriveled, thin ears grew. And the thin ears swallowed the good ones. I told all my magicians, but they're clueless."
[EN15 None] § Joseph's Epic Interpretation
[EN16 25-27] Joseph told Pharaoh, "Dude, both your dreams mean the exact same thing. God is giving you a heads-up about what's about to happen. The seven healthy cows are seven years, and the seven healthy ears of grain are also seven years. It's the same message.
[EN17 26-27] "The seven sick, ugly cows that came after are seven years, and the seven dried-up ears of grain are seven years of famine. A huge food shortage.
[EN18 28-31] "So, here's the deal: God is showing you His plan. There are going to be seven years of insane abundance all over Egypt. But right after that, seven years of a terrible famine will hit. It'll be so bad that everyone will forget how good the plentiful years were. The famine will completely wreck the country.
[EN19 32] "The reason you dreamed it twice is because God is 100% serious about this, and it's going to happen really soon."
[EN20 None] § Joseph's Master Plan
[EN21 33-36] "So, here's what you should do," Joseph continued. "You need to find a really smart and wise dude and put him in charge of the whole country. Then, appoint managers all over Egypt to collect food during the seven good years.
[EN22 34-36] "Their job is to gather up all the extra food and store it in cities under your authority. That way, when the seven years of famine come, you'll have a massive stockpile of food saved up, and the country won't be totally destroyed."
[EN23 37] Pharaoh and his whole crew thought this was a brilliant idea. Total genius.
[EN24 None] § From Prisoner to Prince
[EN25 38] Pharaoh said to his officials, "Could we find anyone better for this job? This guy literally has the Spirit of God in him!"
[EN26 39-41] So Pharaoh turned to Joseph and said, "Since God has shown you all this, there's no one smarter or wiser than you. You're the man. From now on, you're in charge of my palace, and all my people will answer to you. The only person with more power than you will be me, the king."
[EN27 41-43] Then Pharaoh made it official. "I'm putting you in charge of all of Egypt." He took off his special royal ring and put it on Joseph's finger. He dressed him in super fancy clothes and put a gold chain around his neck. He even gave him the second-best chariot to ride in, and people shouted "Bow down!" as he passed.
[EN28 44] Pharaoh told him, "I'm Pharaoh, but for real, nobody in Egypt is going to lift a hand or a foot without your okay."
[EN29 45] Then Pharaoh gave Joseph an Egyptian name, Zaphenath-Paneah, which means "God Speaks and He Lives." He also gave him a wife, Asenath, whose dad was a priest in the city of On. And just like that, Joseph was running the whole country.
[EN30 46] Joseph was thirty years old when he started working for Pharaoh. He left the king's presence and immediately started organizing all of Egypt.
[EN31 None] § The Good Times and the Bad
[EN32 47-49] For the next seven years, the land produced a crazy amount of food. It was a total boom. Joseph collected all the surplus food and stored it in the cities. He gathered so much grain it was like counting the sand on the beach. Eventually, he just stopped keeping track because there was too much.
[EN33 50-52] Before the famine started, Joseph and his wife Asenath had two sons. He named the first one Manasseh, which means "Forget," because he said, "God made me forget all my suffering and my family back home." He named the second one Ephraim, meaning "Double Prosperity," saying, "God has made me successful in this land where I've suffered so much."
[EN34 53-54] Then, just as Joseph predicted, the seven years of plenty ended, and the seven years of famine began. The famine hit every country, but thanks to Joseph, Egypt was the only place that had food.
[EN35 55] When the people of Egypt started running out of food, they cried to Pharaoh for help. Pharaoh told them, "Go to Joseph. Do whatever he says."
[EN36 56-57] The famine got worse and worse everywhere. So Joseph opened up the storehouses and started selling grain to the Egyptians. And it wasn't just them—people from all over the world started coming to Egypt to buy grain from Joseph because the famine was that bad everywhere else. It was a global crisis.
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 41] 1-4 Two years passed and Pharaoh had a dream: He was standing by the Nile River. Seven cows came up out of the Nile, all shimmering with health, and grazed on the marsh grass. Then seven other cows, all skin and bones, came up out of the river after them and stood by them on the bank of the Nile. The skinny cows ate the seven healthy cows. Then Pharaoh woke up.
[MSG1 5-7] He went back to sleep and dreamed a second time: Seven ears of grain, full-bodied and lush, grew out of a single stalk. Then seven more ears grew up, but these were thin and dried out by the east wind. The thin ears swallowed up the full, healthy ears. Then Pharaoh woke up—another dream.
[MSG2 8] When morning came, he was upset. He sent for all the magicians and sages of Egypt. Pharaoh told them his dreams, but they couldn’t interpret them to him.
[MSG3 9-13] The head cupbearer spoke up and said to Pharaoh, “I just now remembered something—I’m sorry, I should have told you this long ago. Once when Pharaoh got angry with his servants, he locked me and the head baker in the house of the captain of the guard. We both had dreams on the same night, each dream with its own meaning. It so happened that there was a young Hebrew slave there with us; he belonged to the captain of the guard. We told him our dreams and he interpreted them for us, each dream sepa
[MSG4 14] Pharaoh at once sent for Joseph. They brought him on the run from the jail cell. He cut his hair, put on clean clothes, and came to Pharaoh.
[MSG5 15] “I dreamed a dream,” Pharaoh told Joseph. “Nobody can interpret it. But I’ve heard that just by hearing a dream you can interpret it.”
[MSG6 16] Joseph answered, “Not I, but God. God will set Pharaoh’s mind at ease.”
[MSG7 17-21] Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “In my dream I was standing on the bank of the Nile. Seven cows, shimmering with health, came up out of the river and grazed on the marsh grass. On their heels seven more cows, all skin and bones, came up. I’ve never seen uglier cows anywhere in Egypt. Then the seven skinny, ugly cows ate up the first seven healthy cows. But you couldn’t tell by looking—after eating them up they were just as skinny and ugly as before. Then I woke up.
[MSG8 22-24] “In my second dream I saw seven ears of grain, full-bodied and lush, growing out of a single stalk, and right behind them, seven other ears, shriveled, thin, and dried out by the east wind. And the thin ears swallowed up the full ears. I’ve told all this to the magicians but they can’t figure it out.”
[MSG9 25-27] Joseph said to Pharaoh, “Pharaoh’s two dreams both mean the same thing. God is telling Pharaoh what he is going to do. The seven healthy cows are seven years and the seven healthy ears of grain are seven years—they’re the same dream. The seven sick and ugly cows that followed them up are seven years and the seven scrawny ears of grain dried out by the east wind are the same—seven years of famine.
[MSG10 28-32] “The meaning is what I said earlier: God is letting Pharaoh in on what he is going to do. Seven years of plenty are on their way throughout Egypt. But on their heels will come seven years of famine, leaving no trace of the Egyptian plenty. As the country is emptied by famine, there won’t be even a scrap left of the previous plenty—the famine will be total. The fact that Pharaoh dreamed the same dream twice emphasizes God’s determination to do this and do it soon.
[MSG11 33-36] “So, Pharaoh needs to look for a wise and experienced man and put him in charge of the country. Then Pharaoh needs to appoint managers throughout the country of Egypt to organize it during the years of plenty. Their job will be to collect all the food produced in the good years ahead and stockpile the grain under Pharaoh’s authority, storing it in the towns for food. This grain will be held back to be used later during the seven years of famine that are coming on Egypt. This way the country won’
[MSG12 37] This seemed like a good idea to Pharaoh and his officials.
[MSG13 38] Then Pharaoh said to his officials, “Isn’t this the man we need? Are we going to find anyone else who has God’s spirit in him like this?”
[MSG14 39-40] So Pharaoh said to Joseph, “You’re the man for us. God has given you the inside story—no one is as qualified as you in experience and wisdom. From now on, you’re in charge of my affairs; all my people will report to you. Only as king will I be over you.”
[MSG15 41-43] So Pharaoh commissioned Joseph: “I’m putting you in charge of the entire country of Egypt.” Then Pharaoh removed his signet ring from his finger and slipped it on Joseph’s hand. He outfitted him in robes of the best linen and put a gold chain around his neck. He put the second-in-command chariot at his disposal, and as he rode people shouted “Bravo!” Joseph was in charge of the entire country of Egypt.
[MSG16 44] Pharaoh told Joseph, “I am Pharaoh, but no one in Egypt will make a single move without your stamp of approval.”
[MSG17 45] Then Pharaoh gave Joseph an Egyptian name, Zaphenath-Paneah (God Speaks and He Lives). He also gave him an Egyptian wife, Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, the priest of On (Heliopolis). And Joseph took up his duties over the land of Egypt.
[MSG18 46] Joseph was thirty years old when he went to work for Pharaoh the king of Egypt. As soon as Joseph left Pharaoh’s presence, he began his work in Egypt.
[MSG19 47-49] During the next seven years of plenty the land produced bumper crops. Joseph gathered up the food of the seven good years in Egypt and stored the food in cities. In each city he stockpiled surplus from the surrounding fields. Joseph collected so much grain—it was like the sand of the ocean!—that he finally quit keeping track.
[MSG20 50-52] Joseph had two sons born to him before the years of famine came. Asenath, daughter of Potiphera the priest of On, was their mother. Joseph named the firstborn Manasseh (Forget), saying, “God made me forget all my hardships and my parental home.” He named his second son Ephraim (Double Prosperity), saying, “God has prospered me in the land of my sorrow.”
[MSG21 53-54] Then Egypt’s seven good years came to an end and the seven years of famine arrived, just as Joseph had said. All countries experienced famine; Egypt was the only country that had bread.
[MSG22 55] When the famine spread throughout Egypt, the people called out in distress to Pharaoh, calling for bread. He told the Egyptians, “Go to Joseph. Do what he tells you.”
[MSG23 56-57] As the famine got worse all over the country, Joseph opened the storehouses and sold emergency supplies to the Egyptians. The famine was very bad. Soon the whole world was coming to buy supplies from Joseph. The famine was bad all over.