===== CHAPTER 45: The Biggest Plot Twist: Joseph is Alive! (16 EN, 16 KO, 12 MSG) =====
[EN0 None] § The Big Reveal
[EN1 1-3] Joseph just couldn’t keep it together anymore in front of all his staff. He yelled, “Everyone get out! I need the room!” So, it was just him and his brothers when he finally told them who he was. He was crying so hard that all the Egyptians heard it, and the news even got back to Pharaoh’s palace.
[EN2 3-4] Joseph said to his brothers, “It’s me, Joseph. Is my dad really still alive?” But his brothers were totally shook. They couldn’t even speak; they were just staring, completely mind-blown.
[EN3 4-8] “Come on, get closer,” Joseph said. So they did. “Yeah, it’s me. I’m your brother, Joseph. The one you sold to Egypt. But hey, don’t beat yourselves up about it. This was all God’s plan. He sent me here ahead of you guys to save lives. We’ve had this crazy famine for two years, and there are still five more to go, with no farming or anything. God sent me here to make sure our family line survives and to pull off this epic rescue mission. So, for real, it wasn’t you who sent me here. It was God. 
[EN4 None] § The Plan to Bring Jacob to Egypt
[EN5 9-11] “Now, hurry back to my dad and tell him his son Joseph says: ‘God has made me the boss of all of Egypt. Get down here ASAP. You’ll live in Goshen, super close to me—you, your kids, your grandkids, all your animals, everything. I’ll take care of you. We’ve still got five years of this famine left, but I’ll make sure you and your whole crew have everything you need. You won’t lack a thing.’
[EN6 12-13] “Look, you can see it with your own eyes, and my bro Benjamin sees it too—it’s really me telling you all this. Go tell my dad how I’m living large here in Egypt, tell him everything you’ve seen. But don’t waste time—get my dad down here now!”
[EN7 14-15] Then Joseph hugged his brother Benjamin, and they both just cried. Then he kissed all his brothers and cried with them. After that, they finally started talking to him.
[EN8 16] When the news hit Pharaoh’s palace that Joseph’s brothers were here, Pharaoh and his whole crew were actually pretty stoked about it.
[EN9 17-18] Pharaoh told Joseph, “Tell your brothers the plan: Load up your animals, go back to Canaan, and bring your dad and your families back here. I’ll give you the best land in Egypt, and you’ll be living the good life.”
[EN10 19-20] “And tell them this, too: ‘Take some wagons from Egypt for your kids and wives, and get your dad and come back. Don’t even worry about the stuff you’re leaving behind, because the best of everything in Egypt is yours for the taking.’”
[EN11 None] § The Journey Home
[EN12 21-23] So that’s exactly what they did. Joseph gave them the wagons Pharaoh promised and a bunch of food for the road. He gave all his brothers brand-new clothes, but he hooked Benjamin up with 300 pieces of silver and a bunch of fresh outfits. And for his dad, he sent ten donkeys loaded with all the best stuff from Egypt, and another ten donkeys loaded with grain, bread, and other food for the trip back.
[EN13 24] Then he sent his brothers on their way. As they were leaving, he told them, “Don’t get into any fights on the way back, okay? Just chill.”
[EN14 25-27] They left Egypt and went back to their dad, Jacob, in Canaan. When they told him, “Joseph is alive! And he’s the ruler of all of Egypt!” he was just numb. He couldn’t believe it. But the more they told him everything Joseph had said, and when he saw the wagons Joseph had sent to bring him back, he started to come back to life. His spirit totally revived.
[EN15 28] Israel said, “That’s all I needed to hear. My son Joseph is alive. I have to go see him before I die.”
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 45] 1-2 Joseph couldn’t hold himself in any longer, keeping up a front before all his attendants. He cried out, “Leave! Clear out—everyone leave!” So there was no one with Joseph when he identified himself to his brothers. But his sobbing was so violent that the Egyptians couldn’t help but hear him. The news was soon reported to Pharaoh’s palace.
[MSG1 3] Joseph spoke to his brothers: “I am Joseph. Is my father really still alive?” But his brothers couldn’t say a word. They were speechless—they couldn’t believe what they were hearing and seeing.
[MSG2 4-8] “Come closer to me,” Joseph said to his brothers. They came closer. “I am Joseph your brother whom you sold into Egypt. But don’t feel badly, don’t blame yourselves for selling me. God was behind it. God sent me here ahead of you to save lives. There has been a famine in the land now for two years; the famine will continue for five more years—neither plowing nor harvesting. God sent me on ahead to pave the way and make sure there was a remnant in the land, to save your lives in an amazing act of
[MSG3 9-11] “Hurry back to my father. Tell him, ‘Your son Joseph says: I’m master of all of Egypt. Come as fast as you can and join me here. I’ll give you a place to live in Goshen where you’ll be close to me—you, your children, your grandchildren, your flocks, your herds, and anything else you can think of. I’ll take care of you there completely. There are still five more years of famine ahead; I’ll make sure all your needs are taken care of, you and everyone connected with you—you won’t want for a thing.’
[MSG4 12-13] “Look at me. You can see for yourselves, and my brother Benjamin can see for himself, that it’s me, my own mouth, telling you all this. Tell my father all about the high position I hold in Egypt, tell him everything you’ve seen here, but don’t take all day—hurry up and get my father down here.”
[MSG5 14-15] Then Joseph threw himself on his brother Benjamin’s neck and wept, and Benjamin wept on his neck. He then kissed all his brothers and wept over them. Only then were his brothers able to talk with him.
[MSG6 16] The story was reported in Pharaoh’s palace: “Joseph’s brothers have come.” It was good news to Pharaoh and all who worked with him.
[MSG7 17-18] Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Tell your brothers, ‘This is the plan: Load up your pack animals; go to Canaan, get your father and your families and bring them back here. I’ll settle you on the best land in Egypt—you’ll live off the fat of the land.’
[MSG8 19-20] “Also tell them this: ‘Here’s what I want you to do: Take wagons from Egypt to carry your little ones and your wives and load up your father and come back. Don’t worry about having to leave things behind; the best in all of Egypt will be yours.’”
[MSG9 21-23] And they did just that, the sons of Israel. Joseph gave them the wagons that Pharaoh had promised and food for the trip. He outfitted all the brothers in brand-new clothes, but he gave Benjamin three hundred pieces of silver and several suits of clothes. He sent his father these gifts: ten donkeys loaded with Egypt’s best products and another ten donkeys loaded with grain and bread, provisions for his father’s journey back.
[MSG10 24] Then he sent his brothers off. As they left he told them, “Take it easy on the journey; try to get along with each other.”
[MSG11 25-28] They left Egypt and went back to their father Jacob in Canaan. When they told him, “Joseph is still alive—and he’s the ruler over the whole land of Egypt!” he went numb; he couldn’t believe his ears. But the more they talked, telling him everything that Joseph had told them and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him back, the blood started to flow again—their father Jacob’s spirit revived. Israel said, “I’ve heard enough—my son Joseph is still alive. I’ve got to go and see him 