===== CHAPTER 24: Finding Isaac's Perfect Match (39 EN, 39 KO, 28 MSG) =====
[EN0 None] § A Mission for Isaac's Future Wife
[EN1 1-4] Abraham was super old by now, and God had seriously blessed him in every single way. He called over his most trusted servant, the guy in charge of everything, and said, “Put your hand under my thigh and make a promise to God, the God of heaven and earth. You have to swear you won’t get a wife for my son Isaac from any of the local Canaanite girls. Instead, you’ve got to go back to my homeland, to my relatives, and find a wife for him there.”
[EN2 5] The servant was like, “But what if the girl isn’t willing to leave her home and come all the way back with me? Should I take your son Isaac back to your old country then?”
[EN3 6-9] “No way!” Abraham shot back. “Absolutely not. Don’t you dare take my son back there. The God of heaven, who brought me from my father’s house and my homeland, promised me, ‘I’m giving this land to your descendants.’ He’ll send his angel ahead of you to make sure you get a wife for my son from there. If the woman refuses to come, then you’re free from this promise. But whatever you do, don’t take my son back.” So the servant put his hand under his master Abraham’s thigh and made the solemn promis
[EN4 None] § The Test at the Well
[EN5 10-14] The servant took ten of his master’s camels, packed a bunch of amazing gifts from his master, and set off for Aram Naharaim, to the city of Nahor. When he got there, he had the camels kneel down by a well outside the city. It was evening, the time when women usually came out to get water. Then he prayed, “O God, the God of my master Abraham, please give me success today. Be kind to my master Abraham. Look, I’m standing here by the spring, and the young women of the town are coming to get water. 
[EN6 None] § God's Answer Arrives
[EN7 15-16] He had barely finished praying when, believe it or not, Rebekah showed up. She was the daughter of Bethuel, who was the son of Milcah, the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor. She was carrying a water jug on her shoulder. The girl was seriously beautiful, a total knockout, and a virgin. She went down to the spring, filled her jug, and started walking back up. The servant ran to meet her and said, “Please, could I have a little sip of water from your jug?”
[EN8 17-21] “Of course, sir, drink,” she said. She quickly lowered the jug and held it for him to drink. After he finished, she said, “I’ll get water for your camels, too, until they’ve had all they want.” She quickly emptied her jug into the trough for the animals, ran back to the well to get more water, and kept going until all the camels were watered. The man just watched her, totally silent, wondering if this was for real. Was this God’s answer? Was his trip a success or not?
[EN9 None] § Gifts and Questions
[EN10 22-23] When the camels were done drinking, the man pulled out some expensive gifts: a gold nose ring and two heavy gold bracelets. He gave them to her and asked, “Tell me, whose daughter are you? And do you think your father has a guest room where we could spend the night?”
[EN11 24-25] She answered, “I’m the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor and Milcah. And yeah, we totally have room for you to stay. We’ve got plenty of straw and feed for the camels, too.”
[EN12 26-27] The man bowed his head and worshiped God, saying, “Praise be to God, the God of my master Abraham. You have been so kind and faithful to my master. You led me straight to my master’s relatives!”
[EN13 28] The girl then ran off and told her mom’s whole household everything that had just happened.
[EN14 None] § A Warm Welcome
[EN15 29-32] Now, Rebekah had a brother named Laban. As soon as he saw the nose ring and the bracelets on his sister’s arms and heard her story about what the man said, Laban ran outside to the well. The man was still standing there with his camels. Laban went up to him and said, “Come on in, you who are blessed by God! Why are you just standing out here? I’ve already got the house ready for you and a place for your camels.”
[EN16 32-33] So the man went into the house. They unloaded the camels and gave them straw and feed. Then they brought water so the man and his crew could wash their feet. When they brought out food, the servant said, “I’m not eating until I’ve told you why I’m here.”
[EN17 33] “Okay,” Laban said. “Go ahead, tell us.”
[EN18 None] § The Servant's Story
[EN19 34-38] The servant began, “I am Abraham’s servant. God has blessed my master like crazy, and he’s become a great man. God has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold, male and female servants, camels and donkeys. Then, to top it all off, my master’s wife, Sarah, had a son in her old age, and my master has given him everything he owns. My master made me swear an oath, saying, ‘Don’t get a wife for my son from the Canaanite girls who live here. You must go to my father’s family, to my own relatives, 
[EN20 39-41] I asked my master, ‘But what if the woman won’t come with me?’ He answered, ‘The God I have always followed will send his angel with you and make your trip successful. You will get a wife for my son from my own family. Then you will be released from your oath. If you go to my family and they refuse to give her to you, you’ll be released from the oath then, too.’
[EN21 42-44] So when I got to the well today, I prayed, ‘God of my master Abraham, if you are willing, please make my mission a success. I’m standing by this well. When a young woman comes to get water, I’ll say, “Please give me a little water from your jug.” If she says, “Sure, and I’ll water your camels too,” let her be the wife you have chosen for my master’s son.’
[EN22 45-48] I had barely finished praying in my head when Rebekah came out with her jug on her shoulder. She went down to the well and drew water, and I said to her, ‘Please, give me a drink.’ She immediately lowered her jug and said, ‘Drink, and I’ll water your camels too.’ So I drank, and she watered the camels. Then I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She said, ‘The daughter of Bethuel, son of Nahor and Milcah.’ So I put the ring in her nose and the bracelets on her arms. Then I bowed down and worship
[EN23 49] So now, tell me. Are you going to be kind and faithful to my master? If yes, tell me. If not, tell me that too, so I know what to do next.”
[EN24 None] § The Family Agrees
[EN25 50-51] Laban and Bethuel answered, “This is clearly from God. We can’t say a thing, yes or no. Look, here’s Rebekah. Take her and go. Let her become the wife of your master’s son, just as God has said.”
[EN26 52-53] When Abraham’s servant heard their answer, he bowed down to the ground and worshiped God. Then he brought out gifts of silver and gold, and some beautiful clothes, and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave expensive gifts to her brother and her mother. Then he and his men ate and drank and stayed the night.
[EN27 None] § Time to Go
[EN28 54] When they got up the next morning, he said, “Send me back to my master.”
[EN29 55] But her brother and mother said, “Let the girl stay with us for about ten more days. Then she can go.”
[EN30 56] But he said, “Don’t make me wait! God has made my journey a success. Let me go, so I can return to my master.”
[EN31 57-58] They said, “Okay, let’s call the girl and ask her what she wants to do.” So they called Rebekah and asked her, “Are you willing to go with this man?”
[EN32 58] She said, “Yes, I am.”
[EN33 59-60] So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way, with her childhood nurse, along with Abraham’s servant and his men. And they blessed Rebekah, saying: “Our sister, may you become the mother of thousands upon ten thousands! May your descendants conquer the cities of their enemies!”
[EN34 61] Then Rebekah and her maids got on the camels and followed the servant. So the servant took Rebekah and left.
[EN35 None] § Isaac Meets Rebekah
[EN36 62-65] Meanwhile, Isaac had come from Beer Lahai Roi and was living in the Negev desert. One evening, he went out into the field to meditate. He looked up and saw camels approaching. Rebekah also looked up and saw Isaac. She got down from her camel and asked the servant, “Who’s that man in the field walking toward us?”
[EN37 65] The servant said, “That is my master.” So she took her veil and covered her face.
[EN38 66-67] The servant told Isaac the whole story of what had happened. Then Isaac brought Rebekah into his mother Sarah’s tent. He married her, and she became his wife, and he loved her. And so Isaac was comforted after the death of his mother.
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 24] Abraham was now an old man. God had blessed Abraham in every way.
[MSG1 2-4] Abraham spoke to the senior servant in his household, the one in charge of everything he had, “Put your hand under my thigh and swear by God—God of Heaven, God of Earth—that you will not get a wife for my son from among the young women of the Canaanites here, but will go to the land of my birth and get a wife for my son Isaac.”
[MSG2 5] The servant answered, “But what if the woman refuses to leave home and come with me? Do I then take your son back to your home country?”
[MSG3 6-8] Abraham said, “Oh no. Never. By no means are you to take my son back there. God, the God of Heaven, took me from the home of my father and from the country of my birth and spoke to me in solemn promise, ‘I’m giving *this* land to your descendants.’ This God will send his angel ahead of you to get a wife for my son. And if the woman won’t come, you are free from this oath you’ve sworn to me. But under no circumstances are you to take my son back there.”
[MSG4 9] So the servant put his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and gave his solemn oath.
[MSG5 10-14] The servant took ten of his master’s camels and, loaded with gifts from his master, traveled to Aram Naharaim and the city of Nahor. Outside the city, he made the camels kneel at a well. It was evening, the time when the women came to draw water. He prayed, “O God, God of my master Abraham, make things go smoothly this day; treat my master Abraham well! As I stand here by the spring while the young women of the town come out to get water, let the girl to whom I say, ‘Lower your jug and give me a
[MSG6 15-17] It so happened that the words were barely out of his mouth when Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel whose mother was Milcah the wife of Nahor, Abraham’s brother, came out with a water jug on her shoulder. The girl was stunningly beautiful, a pure virgin. She went down to the spring, filled her jug, and came back up. The servant ran to meet her and said, “Please, can I have a sip of water from your jug?”
[MSG7 18-21] She said, “Certainly, drink!” And she held the jug so that he could drink. When he had satisfied his thirst she said, “I’ll get water for your camels, too, until they’ve drunk their fill.” She promptly emptied her jug into the trough and ran back to the well to fill it, and she kept at it until she had watered all the camels. The man watched, silent. Was this God’s answer? Had God made his trip a success or not?
[MSG8 22-23] When the camels had finished drinking, the man brought out gifts, a gold nose ring weighing a little over a quarter of an ounce and two arm bracelets weighing about four ounces, and gave them to her. He asked her, “Tell me about your family? Whose daughter are you? Is there room in your father’s house for us to stay the night?”
[MSG9 24-25] She said, “I’m the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah and Nahor. And there’s plenty of room in our house for you to stay—and lots of straw and feed besides.”
[MSG10 26-27] At this the man bowed in worship before God and prayed, “Blessed be God, God of my master Abraham: How generous and true you’ve been to my master; you’ve held nothing back. You led me right to the door of my master’s brother!”
[MSG11 28] And the girl was off and running, telling everyone in her mother’s house what had happened.
[MSG12 29-31] Rebekah had a brother named Laban. Laban ran outside to the man at the spring. He had seen the nose ring and the bracelets on his sister and had heard her say, “The man said this and this and this to me.” So he went to the man and there he was, still standing with his camels at the spring. Laban welcomed him: “Come on in, blessed of God! Why are you standing out here? I’ve got the house ready for you; and there’s also a place for your camels.”
[MSG13 32-33] So the man went into the house. The camels were unloaded and given straw and feed. Water was brought to bathe the feet of the man and the men with him. Then Laban brought out food. But the man said, “I won’t eat until I tell my story.” Laban said, “Go ahead; tell us.”
[MSG14 34-41] The servant said, “I’m the servant of Abraham. God has blessed my master—he’s a great man; God has given him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, servants and maidservants, camels and donkeys. And then to top it off, Sarah, my master’s wife, gave him a son in her old age and he has passed everything on to his son. My master made me promise, ‘Don’t get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites in whose land I live. No, go to my father’s home, back to my family, and get a wife for my so
[MSG15 42-44] “Well, when I came this very day to the spring, I prayed, ‘God, God of my master Abraham, make things turn out well in this task I’ve been given. I’m standing at this well. When a young woman comes here to draw water and I say to her, Please, give me a sip of water from your jug, and she says, Not only will I give you a drink, I’ll also water your camels—let that woman be the wife God has picked out for my master’s son.’
[MSG16 45-48] “I had barely finished offering this prayer, when Rebekah arrived, her jug on her shoulder. She went to the spring and drew water and I said, ‘Please, can I have a drink?’ She didn’t hesitate. She held out her jug and said, ‘Drink; and when you’re finished I’ll also water your camels.’ I drank, and she watered the camels. I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She said, ‘The daughter of Bethuel whose parents were Nahor and Milcah.’ I gave her a ring for her nose, bracelets for her arms, and bowe
[MSG17 49] “Now, tell me what you are going to do. If you plan to respond with a generous *yes*, tell me. But if not, tell me plainly so I can figure out what to do next.”
[MSG18 50-51] Laban and Bethuel answered, “This is undeniably from God. We have no say in the matter, either yes or no. Rebekah is yours: Take her and go; let her be the wife of your master’s son, as God has made plain.”
[MSG19 52-54] When Abraham’s servant heard their decision, he bowed in worship before God. Then he brought out gifts of silver and gold and clothing and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave expensive gifts to her brother and mother. He and his men had supper and spent the night. But first thing in the morning they were up. He said, “Send me back to my master.”
[MSG20 55] Her brother and mother said, “Let the girl stay a while, say another ten days, and then go.”
[MSG21 56] He said, “Oh, don’t make me wait! God has worked everything out so well—send me off to my master.”
[MSG22 57] They said, “We’ll call the girl; we’ll ask her.” They called Rebekah and asked her, “Do you want to go with this man?”
[MSG23 58] She said, “I’m ready to go.”
[MSG24 59-60] So they sent them off, their sister Rebekah with her nurse, and Abraham’s servant with his men. And they blessed Rebekah saying, You’re our sister—live bountifully!     And your children, triumphantly!
[MSG25 61] Rebekah and her young maids mounted the camels and followed the man. The servant took Rebekah and set off for home.
[MSG26 62-65] Isaac was living in the Negev. He had just come back from a visit to Beer Lahai Roi. In the evening he went out into the field; while meditating he looked up and saw camels coming. When Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac, she got down from her camel and asked the servant, “Who is that man out in the field coming toward us?” “That is my master.” She took her veil and covered herself.
[MSG27 66-67] After the servant told Isaac the whole story of the trip, Isaac took Rebekah into the tent of his mother Sarah. He married Rebekah and she became his wife and he loved her. So Isaac found comfort after his mother’s death.