===== CHAPTER 43: The Brothers Face the Music in Egypt (23 EN, 23 KO, 17 MSG) =====
[EN0 None] § Back to Egypt, But With a Catch
[EN1 1-2] The famine was still hitting hard. When Jacob's family finished all the food they'd brought from Egypt, he told his sons, "Go back and get us some more."
[EN2 3-5] But Judah was straight up with him. "Look, Dad, the guy in charge was dead serious. He said, 'You won't even see my face unless you bring your brother with you.' If you let our brother come, we'll go. But if not, we're staying put. It's pointless otherwise. He made it crystal clear."
[EN3 6] Israel (that's Jacob) was like, "Why'd you make my life so hard? Did you really have to tell him you had another brother?"
[EN4 6-7] They shot back, "The man was grilling us! He kept asking about our family, like 'Is your dad still alive? Got any other brothers?' We just answered his questions. How were we supposed to know he'd demand we bring him here?"
[EN5 8-10] Judah stepped up to his dad. "Just let the kid come with me. I'll be responsible for him. We gotta go now, or we're all gonna starve—us, you, and all our kids. I swear on my life, I'll keep him safe. If I don't bring him back, I'll take the blame forever. Seriously, if we hadn't wasted all this time arguing, we could've been there and back twice already."
[EN6 None] § The Plan and the Gifts
[EN7 11-14] Finally, their dad Israel caved. "Fine, if that's how it has to be. But here's the plan: pack up the best stuff we have—like balm, honey, spices, perfumes, pistachios, and almonds—and take it as a gift for the man. And take double the money. Pay back what was in your sacks; it was probably a mistake. Now take your brother and go. I pray the big man upstairs shows you some mercy so he sends back your other brother and Benjamin. As for me... I've already lost so much. What's one more?"
[EN8 15] So the brothers grabbed the gifts, the extra cash, and Benjamin. They didn't waste any time and headed straight for Egypt to meet Joseph.
[EN9 None] § An Awkward Welcome
[EN10 16] When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he told his head servant, "Bring these guys inside. Cook up a big meal. They're eating with me at noon."
[EN11 17-18] The servant did what he was told and led them into the house. But the brothers started freaking out. They were whispering, "It's gotta be about the money from last time. He thinks we stole it. Now he's got us trapped and is gonna make us his slaves and take our donkeys!"
[EN12 18-22] So they pulled the head servant aside at the door. "Excuse me, sir," they said. "We came here once before to buy food. On the way home, we opened our bags and found the exact amount of money we paid right at the top. We brought it all back, plus more to buy food. We have no clue who put the money in our bags."
[EN13 23] The servant was chill. "It's all good, don't worry," he said. "Your God, and your father's God, must've slipped you a little bonus. I got your payment in full." Then he brought out their brother, Simeon.
[EN14 24-25] He took them inside, made them feel at home, gave them water to wash their feet, and fed their donkeys. The brothers laid out their gifts and waited for Joseph to show up for their noon meal.
[EN15 None] § The Big Reunion (Almost)
[EN16 26] When Joseph got home, they gave him the gifts and bowed down low.
[EN17 27] Joseph greeted them, "So, how's that old father you told me about? Is he still alive and well?"
[EN18 28] "Yes, sir," they replied. "Your servant, our father, is doing great." And they bowed down again.
[EN19 29] Then Joseph spotted his brother Benjamin, his own mom's son. "Is this the youngest brother you told me about?" he asked. Then he said, "God be gracious to you, my son."
[EN20 30-31] Seeing his brother hit him right in the feels, and he was about to start bawling. Joseph rushed out to another room for a good cry. Then he washed his face, got himself together, and came back out, saying, "Let's eat."
[EN21 32-33] Joseph ate at his own table, the brothers had their own, and the Egyptians had theirs (because Egyptians thought eating with Hebrews was gross). The brothers were seated right across from Joseph, lined up from oldest to youngest. They just stared at each other, totally clueless about what was happening.
[EN22 34] When the food was served from Joseph's table, Benjamin's plate was piled way higher than anyone else's. And so they all had a feast with Joseph and drank as much as they wanted.
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 43] 1-2 The famine got worse. When they had eaten all the food they had brought back from Egypt, their father said, “Go back and get some more food.”
[MSG1 3-5] But Judah said, “The man warned us most emphatically, ‘You won’t so much as see my face if you don’t have your brother with you.’ If you’re ready to release our brother to go with us, we’ll go down and get you food. But if you’re not ready, we aren’t going. What would be the use? The man told us, ‘You won’t so much as see my face if you don’t have your brother with you.’”
[MSG2 6] Israel said, “Why are you making my life so difficult! Why did you ever tell the man you had another brother?”
[MSG3 7] They said, “The man pressed us hard, asking pointed questions about our family: ‘Is your father alive? Do you have another brother?’ So we answered his questions. How did we know that he’d say, ‘Bring your brother here’?”
[MSG4 8-10] Judah pushed his father Israel. “Let the boy go; I’ll take charge of him. Let us go and be on our way—if we don’t get going, we’re all going to starve to death—we and you and our children, too! I’ll take full responsibility for his safety; it’s my life on the line for his. If I don’t bring him back safe and sound, I’m the guilty one; I’ll take all the blame. If we had gone ahead in the first place instead of procrastinating like this, we could have been there and back twice over.”
[MSG5 11-14] Their father Israel gave in. “If it has to be, it has to be. But do this: stuff your packs with the finest products from the land you can find and take them to the man as gifts—some balm and honey, some spices and perfumes, some pistachios and almonds. And take plenty of money—pay back double what was returned to your sacks; that might have been a mistake. Take your brother and get going. Go back to the man. And may The Strong God give you grace in that man’s eyes so that he’ll send back your ot
[MSG6 15-16] The men took the gifts, double the money, and Benjamin. They lost no time in getting to Egypt and meeting Joseph. When Joseph saw that they had Benjamin with them, he told his house steward, “Take these men into the house and make them at home. Butcher an animal and prepare a meal; these men are going to eat with me at noon.”
[MSG7 17-18] The steward did what Joseph had said and took them inside. But they became anxious when they were brought into Joseph’s home, thinking, “It’s the money; he thinks we ran off with the money on our first trip down here. And now he’s got us where he wants us—he’s going to turn us into slaves and confiscate our donkeys.”
[MSG8 19-22] So they went up to Joseph’s house steward and talked to him in the doorway. They said, “Listen, master. We came down here one other time to buy food. On our way home, the first night out we opened our bags and found our money at the mouth of the bag—the exact amount we’d paid. We’ve brought it all back and have plenty more to buy more food with. We have no idea who put the money in our bags.”
[MSG9 23] The steward said, “Everything’s in order. Don’t worry. Your God and the God of your father must have given you a bonus. I was paid in full.” And with that, he presented Simeon to them.
[MSG10 24-25] He then took them inside Joseph’s house and made them comfortable—gave them water to wash their feet and saw to the feeding of their donkeys. The brothers spread out their gifts as they waited for Joseph to show up at noon—they had been told that they were to have dinner with him.
[MSG11 26] When Joseph got home, they presented him with the gifts they had brought and bowed respectfully before him.
[MSG12 27] Joseph welcomed them and said, “And your old father whom you mentioned to me, how is he? Is he still alive?”
[MSG13 28] They said, “Yes—your servant our father is quite well, very much alive.” And they again bowed respectfully before him.
[MSG14 29] Then Joseph picked out his brother Benjamin, his own mother’s son. He asked, “And is this your youngest brother that you told me about?” Then he said, “God be gracious to you, my son.”
[MSG15 30-31] Deeply moved on seeing his brother and about to burst into tears, Joseph hurried out into another room and had a good cry. Then he washed his face, got a grip on himself, and said, “Let’s eat.”
[MSG16 32-34] Joseph was served at his private table, the brothers off by themselves and the Egyptians off by themselves (Egyptians won’t eat at the same table with Hebrews; it’s repulsive to them). The brothers were seated facing Joseph, arranged in order of their age, from the oldest to the youngest. They looked at one another wide-eyed, wondering what would happen next. When the brothers’ plates were served from Joseph’s table, Benjamin’s plate came piled high, far more so than his brothers. And so the bro