===== CHAPTER 31: Jacob's Great Escape and a Tense Family Showdown (23 EN, 23 KO, 21 MSG) =====
[EN0 None] § Time to Go Home
[EN1 1-3] Jacob heard that Laban’s sons were trash-talking him. “Jacob totally used our dad’s money to get rich at his expense,” they were saying. At the same time, Jacob noticed Laban was acting super weird toward him, not treating him the same at all. That’s when God told Jacob, “Go back to your homeland. I’ll be with you.”
[EN2 4-9] So Jacob had Rachel and Leah meet him out in the field with his flocks. He said, “I’ve noticed your dad has a major attitude with me; he’s not cool like he was before. But my dad’s God is still with me. You both know how hard I’ve worked for your father. But he has still cheated me over and over, changing my wages whenever he felt like it. But God never let him actually hurt me. If he said, ‘Your pay is the speckled animals,’ the whole flock would have speckled babies. If he said, ‘Your pay is t
[EN3 10-13] “One time, when the flocks were mating, I had a dream and saw that all the male goats getting busy were streaked, speckled, and mottled. In the dream, an angel of God called out, ‘Jacob!’ I said, ‘What’s up?’ He said, ‘Look closely. All the mating goats are streaked, speckled, and mottled. I know what Laban’s been doing to you. I’m the God of Bethel, where you dedicated that pillar and made a vow to me. Now it’s time to leave. Get out of this place and go back to the land you were born in.’”
[EN4 14-16] Rachel and Leah replied, “Has he treated us any better? We’re basically treated like strangers. All he cared about was the money he got for selling us, and he’s already spent it all. Any of the wealth God took from our father and gave back to us is rightfully ours and our children’s. So just go ahead and do what God told you.”
[EN5 None] § The Great Escape
[EN6 17-18] So Jacob did it. He put his kids and his wives on camels, gathered all his livestock and everything he had acquired in Paddan Aram, and started the journey back home to his father Isaac in the land of Canaan.
[EN7 19-21] While Laban was away shearing his sheep, Rachel stole her father’s household idols. Jacob was so sneaky with his plans that Laban the Aramean had no idea what was happening—he was totally clueless. Jacob got away with everything he owned, crossed the Euphrates River, and headed for the hill country of Gilead.
[EN8 22-24] Three days later, Laban got the news: “Jacob ran off.” Laban gathered his relatives and chased after him. Seven days later, they caught up with him in the hill country of Gilead. That night, God came to Laban in a dream and said, “Be careful. Don’t say anything to Jacob, good or bad.”
[EN9 None] § The Confrontation
[EN10 25] When Laban finally reached him, Jacob had his tents set up in the Gilead mountains; Laban and his relatives set up their camp there too.
[EN11 26-30] Laban said to Jacob, “What were you thinking, keeping me in the dark and sneaking off, dragging my daughters away like they’re prisoners of war? Why did you run off like a thief? You should have told me! I would have thrown a huge going-away party with music and celebration! But you didn’t even let me kiss my daughters and grandkids goodbye. That was a really dumb move. I could totally mess you up right now, but the God of your father told me last night, ‘Be careful what you do to Jacob.’ I get 
[EN12 31-32] Jacob answered, “I was scared. I thought you would just take your daughters from me by force. But about your gods, if you find them with anyone here, that person will die. With everyone watching, search for yourself. If you find anything that’s yours, take it.” (Jacob had no idea that Rachel had stolen them.)
[EN13 33-35] So Laban searched Jacob’s tent, Leah’s tent, and the tents of the two female servants, but found nothing. He went from Leah’s tent to Rachel’s. Rachel had taken the household gods, hidden them in her camel’s saddlebag, and was sitting on them. After Laban had rummaged through the whole tent and found nothing, Rachel said to her father, “Sorry, Dad, don’t be mad that I can’t stand up, but I’m on my period.” So even though he searched everywhere, he couldn’t find his household gods.
[EN14 None] § Jacob's Turn
[EN15 36-37] Now Jacob was furious. He went off on Laban: “So what’s my crime? What did I do wrong that you hunted me down like this? You’ve gone through all my stuff. Did you find a single thing that belongs to you? Put it out here for everyone to see! Let our families be the jury and decide who’s right.
[EN16 38-42] “For the twenty years I worked for you, your sheep and goats never had a miscarriage. I never ate any of the rams from your flock. If an animal was killed by wild beasts, I never brought you the carcass; I took the loss myself. You made me pay for anything stolen, whether it was my fault or not. I worked in scorching heat during the day and freezing cold at night, and I barely got any sleep. I did this for twenty years! I slaved for you for fourteen years for your two daughters and six years for
[EN17 None] § The Covenant
[EN18 43-44] Laban shot back, “These daughters are my daughters, these kids are my kids, this flock is my flock—everything you see is mine. But what can I do now about my daughters or the children they’ve had? So let’s make a deal, a covenant between us, and let God be the witness.”
[EN19 45-47] So Jacob took a large stone and set it up as a pillar. He told his relatives, “Gather some stones.” They made a pile of stones and ate a meal there together. Laban named it Yegar-sahadutha (which is Aramaic for “Witness Pile”), and Jacob named it Galeed (which is the Hebrew version).
[EN20 48-50] Laban said, “This pile of stones is a witness between you and me from now on.” That’s why it was called Galeed. It was also called Mizpah (which means “Watchtower”), because Laban said, “May God keep watch between us when we are apart. If you mistreat my daughters or marry other women when no one is around, remember, God is our witness.”
[EN21 51-52] Laban went on, “This pile of stones and this pillar I’ve set up are a witness. I will not cross this line to harm you, and you will not cross this line to harm me. The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor will judge between us.”
[EN22 53-55] Jacob made a promise, swearing by the God his father Isaac feared. Then he offered a sacrifice on the mountain and invited his family to share the meal. They ate together and stayed on the mountain that night. The next morning, Laban got up early, kissed his grandkids and daughters, blessed them, and headed back home.
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 31] 1-2 Jacob learned that Laban’s sons were talking behind his back: “Jacob has used our father’s wealth to make himself rich at our father’s expense.” At the same time, Jacob noticed that Laban had changed toward him. He wasn’t treating him the same.
[MSG1 3] That’s when God said to Jacob, “Go back home where you were born. I’ll go with you.”
[MSG2 4-9] So Jacob sent word for Rachel and Leah to meet him out in the field where his flocks were. He said, “I notice that your father has changed toward me; he doesn’t treat me the same as before. But the God of my father hasn’t changed; he’s still with me. You know how hard I’ve worked for your father. Still, your father has cheated me over and over, changing my wages time and again. But God never let him really hurt me. If he said, ‘Your wages will consist of speckled animals’ the whole flock would s
[MSG3 10-11] “Once, while the flocks were mating, I had a dream and saw the billy goats, all of them streaked, speckled, and mottled, mounting their mates. In the dream an angel of God called out to me, ‘Jacob!’ “I said, ‘Yes?’
[MSG4 12-13] “He said, ‘Watch closely. Notice that all the goats in the flock that are mating are streaked, speckled, and mottled. I know what Laban’s been doing to you. I’m the God of Bethel where you consecrated a pillar and made a vow to me. Now be on your way, get out of this place, go home to your birthplace.’”
[MSG5 14-16] Rachel and Leah said, “Has he treated us any better? Aren’t we treated worse than outsiders? All he wanted was the money he got from selling us, and he’s spent all that. Any wealth that God has seen fit to return to us from our father is justly ours and our children’s. Go ahead. Do what God told you.”
[MSG6 17-18] Jacob did it. He put his children and his wives on camels and gathered all his livestock and everything he had gotten, everything acquired in Paddan Aram, to go back home to his father Isaac in the land of Canaan.
[MSG7 19-21] Laban was off shearing sheep. Rachel stole her father’s household gods. And Jacob had concealed his plans so well that Laban the Aramean had no idea what was going on—he was totally in the dark. Jacob got away with everything he had and was soon across the Euphrates headed for the hill country of Gilead.
[MSG8 22-24] Three days later, Laban got the news: “Jacob’s run off.” Laban rounded up his relatives and chased after him. Seven days later they caught up with him in the hill country of Gilead. That night God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream and said, “Be careful what you do to Jacob, whether good or bad.”
[MSG9 25] When Laban reached him, Jacob’s tents were pitched in the Gilead mountains; Laban pitched his tents there, too.
[MSG10 26-30] “What do you mean,” said Laban, “by keeping me in the dark and sneaking off, hauling my daughters off like prisoners of war? Why did you run off like a thief in the night? Why didn’t you tell me? Why, I would have sent you off with a great celebration—music, timbrels, flutes! But you wouldn’t permit me so much as a kiss for my daughters and grandchildren. It was a stupid thing for you to do. If I had a mind to, I could destroy you right now, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, ‘Be
[MSG11 31-32] Jacob answered Laban, “I was afraid. I thought you would take your daughters away from me by brute force. But as far as your gods are concerned, if you find that anybody here has them, that person dies. With all of us watching, look around. If you find anything here that belongs to you, take it.” Jacob didn’t know that Rachel had stolen the gods.
[MSG12 33-35] Laban went through Jacob’s tent, Leah’s tent, and the tents of the two maids but didn’t find them. He went from Leah’s tent to Rachel’s. But Rachel had taken the household gods, put them inside a camel cushion, and was sitting on them. When Laban had gone through the tent, searching high and low without finding a thing, Rachel said to her father, “Don’t think I’m being disrespectful, my master, that I can’t stand before you, but I’m having my period.” So even though he turned the place upside do
[MSG13 36-37] Now it was Jacob’s turn to get angry. He lit into Laban: “So what’s my crime, what wrong have I done you that you badger me like this? You’ve ransacked the place. Have you turned up a single thing that’s yours? Let’s see it—display the evidence. Our two families can be the jury and decide between us.
[MSG14 38-42] “In the twenty years I’ve worked for you, ewes and she-goats never miscarried. I never feasted on the rams from your flock. I never brought you a torn carcass killed by wild animals but that I paid for it out of my own pocket—actually, you made me pay whether it was my fault or not. I was out in all kinds of weather, from torrid heat to freezing cold, putting in many a sleepless night. For twenty years I’ve done this: I slaved away fourteen years for your two daughters and another six years for 
[MSG15 43-44] Laban defended himself: “The daughters are my daughters, the children are my children, the flock is my flock—everything you see is mine. But what can I do about my daughters or for the children they’ve had? So let’s settle things between us, make a covenant—God will be the witness between us.”
[MSG16 45] Jacob took a stone and set it upright as a pillar.
[MSG17 46-47] Jacob called his family around, “Get stones!” They gathered stones and heaped them up and then ate there beside the pile of stones. Laban named it in Aramaic, Yegar-sahadutha (Witness Monument); Jacob echoed the naming in Hebrew, Galeed (Witness Monument).
[MSG18 48-50] Laban said, “This monument of stones will be a witness, beginning now, between you and me.” (That’s why it is called Galeed—Witness Monument.) It is also called Mizpah (Watchtower) because Laban said, “God keep watch between you and me when we are out of each other’s sight. If you mistreat my daughters or take other wives when there’s no one around to see you, God will see you and stand witness between us.”
[MSG19 51-53] Laban continued to Jacob, “This monument of stones and this stone pillar that I have set up is a witness, a witness that I won’t cross this line to hurt you and you won’t cross this line to hurt me. The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor (the God of their ancestor) will keep things straight between us.”
[MSG20 53-55] Jacob promised, swearing by the Fear, the God of his father Isaac. Then Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain and worshiped, calling in all his family members to the meal. They ate and slept that night on the mountain. Laban got up early the next morning, kissed his grandchildren and his daughters, blessed them, and then set off for home.