===== CHAPTER 48: A Grandfather's Blessing Gets a Plot Twist (14 EN, 14 KO, 8 MSG) =====
[EN0 1-2] A while later, Joseph got the news: "Your dad is sick." So he took his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, and went to see his father. When Jacob was told, "Your son Joseph is here to see you," he rallied and sat up in bed.
[EN1 None] § A Father's Declaration
[EN2 3-7] Jacob said to Joseph, "The Strong God appeared to me at Luz in Canaan and blessed me. He told me, 'I'm going to make you have a huge family, a whole community of people, and I will give this land to your descendants as their permanent property.' Now, listen. Your two sons, who were born here in Egypt before I arrived, I'm adopting them. Ephraim and Manasseh will be my sons, just like Reuben and Simeon are. Any children you have after them will be yours, and they will inherit their property from 
[EN3 None] § A Grandfather's Blessing
[EN4 8] Just then, Jacob noticed Joseph's sons and asked, "Who are these boys?"
[EN5 9] Joseph replied, "They are my sons, the ones God has given me in this place."
[EN6 10-11] "Bring them to me so I can bless them," Jacob said. His eyesight was failing from old age, and he could barely see. Joseph brought his sons close, and Jacob kissed and embraced them. He said to Joseph, "I never thought I'd see your face again, and now God has let me see your children too!"
[EN7 12-14] Joseph then moved his sons from Jacob's knees and bowed with his face to the ground. He took Ephraim in his right hand to place him at Jacob's left, and Manasseh in his left hand to place him at Jacob's right. But Jacob crossed his arms, placing his right hand on the head of Ephraim, the younger son, and his left hand on the head of Manasseh, the firstborn. Then he spoke this blessing:
[EN8 15-16] "The God my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked with,
The God who has been my shepherd my entire life,
The Angel who has rescued me from all harm—
bless these boys.
May my name and the names of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, live on through them.
And may they grow into a huge population on the earth."
[EN9 None] § An Unexpected Switch
[EN10 17-18] When Joseph saw his father place his right hand on Ephraim's head, he was concerned he'd made a mistake. He took his father's hand to move it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's. "No, Father," he said, "this one is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head."
[EN11 19-20] But his father refused. "I know, my son, I know," he said. "He will also become a people, and he will be great. But his younger brother will be even greater, and his descendants will become a multitude of nations." So he blessed them that day, saying, "In your names, Israel will speak a blessing: 'May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh.'" In this way, he put Ephraim ahead of Manasseh.
[EN12 None] § A Final Promise
[EN13 21-22] Then Israel said to Joseph, "I am about to die, but God will be with you and will bring you back to the land of your fathers. And to you, as the first among your brothers, I give one more portion of land than your brothers—the portion I captured from the Amorites with my own sword and bow."
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 48] 1-2 Some time after this conversation, Joseph was told, “Your father is ill.” He took his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, and went to Jacob. When Jacob was told, “Your son Joseph has come,” he roused himself and sat up in bed.
[MSG1 3-7] Jacob said to Joseph, “The Strong God appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me. He said, ‘I’m going to make you prosperous and numerous, turn you into a congregation of tribes; and I’ll turn this land over to your children coming after you as a permanent inheritance.’ I’m adopting your two sons who were born to you here in Egypt before I joined you; they have equal status with Reuben and Simeon. But any children born after them are yours; they will come after their brothers in 
[MSG2 8] Just then Jacob noticed Joseph’s sons and said, “Who are these?”
[MSG3 9-11] Joseph told his father, “They are my sons whom God gave to me in this place.” “Bring them to me,” he said, “so I can bless them.” Israel’s eyesight was poor from old age; he was nearly blind. So Joseph brought them up close. Old Israel kissed and embraced them and then said to Joseph, “I never expected to see your face again, and now God has let me see your children as well!”
[MSG4 12-16] Joseph took them from Israel’s knees and bowed respectfully, his face to the ground. Then Joseph took the two boys, Ephraim with his right hand setting him to Israel’s left, and Manasseh with his left hand setting him to Israel’s right, and stood them before him. But Israel crossed his arms and put his right hand on the head of Ephraim who was the younger and his left hand on the head of Manasseh, the firstborn. Then he blessed them: The God before whom walked my fathers Abraham and Isaac, The G
[MSG5 17-18] When Joseph saw that his father had placed his right hand on Ephraim’s head, he thought he had made a mistake, so he took hold of his father’s hand to move it from Ephraim’s head to Manasseh’s, saying, “That’s the wrong head, Father; the other one is the firstborn; place your right hand on his head.”
[MSG6 19-20] But his father wouldn’t do it. He said, “I know, my son; but I know what I’m doing. He also will develop into a people, and he also will be great. But his younger brother will be even greater and his descendants will enrich nations.” Then he blessed them both: Israel will use your names to give blessings: May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh. In that he made it explicit: he put Ephraim ahead of Manasseh.
[MSG7 21-22] Israel then said to Joseph, “I’m about to die. God be with you and give you safe passage back to the land of your fathers. As for me, I’m presenting you, as the first among your brothers, the ridge of land I took from Amorites with my sword and bow.”