===== CHAPTER 34: A Bloody Revenge for a Sister's Honor (16 EN, 16 KO, 12 MSG) =====
[EN0 None] § A Terrible Day
[EN1 1-4] So one day, Dinah, the daughter Jacob had with Leah, went to hang out with some of the local women. But then this guy Shechem, the son of the local chief Hamor the Hivite, saw her and did something awful—he assaulted and raped her. After that, he got this intense crush on Dinah, fell totally in love, and tried to get her to like him back. He even went to his dad, Hamor, and said, 'You have to get me this girl for my wife.'
[EN2 5-7] Jacob found out that his daughter Dinah had been raped, but his sons were out in the fields with the animals, so he kept quiet until they came home. In the meantime, Shechem's father, Hamor, came over to Jacob's to try and arrange the marriage. When Jacob's sons got back from the fields and heard the news, they were furious. They were absolutely raging. What Shechem did to Jacob's daughter was a huge deal in Israel, something totally unacceptable that you just don't let slide.
[EN3 None] § A Desperate Deal
[EN4 8-10] Hamor tried to smooth things over with Jacob and his sons. 'My son Shechem is head over heels for your daughter,' he said. 'Please let him marry her. Let's connect our families. You give us your daughters, we'll give you ours. You can live here with us, become one big family. Settle down, make yourselves at home, and get rich with us.'
[EN5 11-12] Then Shechem himself jumped in, talking to Dinah's dad and brothers: 'Please, just say yes. I'll pay whatever you want. Name your price for the bride, seriously, the sky's the limit! Just please, give me this girl as my wife.'
[EN6 None] § The Brothers' Deception
[EN7 13-17] But Jacob's sons were clever and tricky in their reply to Shechem and his father. After all, their sister had been brutally violated. They said, 'That's impossible. We could never give our sister to a guy who isn't circumcised. That would be a complete disgrace for us. The only way we can even talk about this is if all your men get circumcised, just like us. If you do that, then we can trade daughters in marriage, live with you, and become one big happy family. But if you refuse, we're taking ou
[EN8 18-19] This sounded like a fair deal to Hamor and his son Shechem. The young guy was so obsessed with Jacob's daughter that he immediately agreed to do it. He was also the most respected son in his whole family.
[EN9 20-23] So Hamor and Shechem went to the city gate and pitched the idea to the town leaders: 'These guys are cool with us, they're friendly. Let's let them settle here and live among us; there's plenty of space for them. And think about it, we can marry their daughters! But, there's one condition for them to live with us and become one family: all of our men have to get circumcised, just like them. This is actually a sweet deal for us—these people are loaded, with tons of animals and wealth, and we'll g
[EN10 24] All the important people in the city agreed with Hamor and Shechem, and every single male in the city was circumcised.
[EN11 None] § Bloody Revenge
[EN12 25-26] Three days after the circumcision, when all the men were still in a lot of pain and recovering, two of Jacob's sons, Simeon and Levi—Dinah's brothers—grabbed their swords, walked straight into the city like they owned the place, and murdered every single man. They killed Hamor and his son Shechem too, rescued Dinah from Shechem's house, and got out of there.
[EN13 27-29] When the rest of Jacob's sons arrived at the massacre, they looted the entire city as payback for what happened to Dinah. They took everything—flocks, herds, donkeys, all their stuff, anything in the city or the fields. They captured all the women and children and took everything valuable from their homes.
[EN14 30] Jacob was horrified and said to Simeon and Levi, 'You've ruined my reputation with everyone who lives here, the Canaanites and Perizzites. They'll see me as a monster. We're so few, if they team up and attack us, we're done for. They'll wipe me and my entire family off the face of the earth.'
[EN15 31] But they just shot back, 'So we're supposed to let someone treat our sister like an immoral woman and get away with it?'
----- MSG -----
[MSG0 34] 1-4 One day Dinah, the daughter Leah had given Jacob, went to visit some of the women in that country. Shechem, the son of Hamor the Hivite who was chieftain there, saw her and raped her. Then he felt a strong attraction to Dinah, Jacob’s daughter, fell in love with her, and wooed her. Shechem went to his father Hamor, “Get me this girl for my wife.”
[MSG1 5-7] Jacob heard that Shechem had raped his daughter Dinah, but his sons were out in the fields with the livestock so he didn’t say anything until they got home. Hamor, Shechem’s father, went to Jacob to work out marriage arrangements. Meanwhile Jacob’s sons on their way back from the fields heard what had happened. They were outraged, explosive with anger. Shechem’s rape of Jacob’s daughter was intolerable in Israel and not to be put up with.
[MSG2 8-10] Hamor spoke with Jacob and his sons, “My son Shechem is head over heels in love with your daughter—give her to him as his wife. Intermarry with us. Give your daughters to us and we’ll give our daughters to you. Live together with us as one family. Settle down among us and make yourselves at home. Prosper among us.”
[MSG3 11-12] Shechem then spoke for himself, addressing Dinah’s father and brothers: “Please, say yes. I’ll pay anything. Set the bridal price as high as you will—the sky’s the limit! Only give me this girl for my wife.”
[MSG4 13-17] Jacob’s sons answered Shechem and his father with cunning. Their sister, after all, had been raped. They said, “This is impossible. We could never give our sister to a man who was uncircumcised. Why, we’d be disgraced. The only condition on which we can talk business is if all your men become circumcised like us. Then we will freely exchange daughters in marriage and make ourselves at home among you and become one big, happy family. But if this is not an acceptable condition, we will take our si
[MSG5 18] That seemed fair enough to Hamor and his son Shechem.
[MSG6 19] The young man was so smitten with Jacob’s daughter that he proceeded to do what had been asked. He was also the most admired son in his father’s family.
[MSG7 20-23] So Hamor and his son Shechem went to the public square and spoke to the town council: “These men like us; they are our friends. Let them settle down here and make themselves at home; there’s plenty of room in the country for them. And, just think, we can even exchange our daughters in marriage. But these men will only accept our invitation to live with us and become one big family on one condition, that all our males become circumcised just as they themselves are. This is a very good deal for us
[MSG8 24] Everyone who was anyone in the city agreed with Hamor and his son, Shechem; every male was circumcised.
[MSG9 25-29] Three days after the circumcision, while all the men were still very sore, two of Jacob’s sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brothers, each with his sword in hand, walked into the city as if they owned the place and murdered every man there. They also killed Hamor and his son Shechem, rescued Dinah from Shechem’s house, and left. When the rest of Jacob’s sons came on the scene of slaughter, they looted the entire city in retaliation for Dinah’s rape. Flocks, herds, donkeys, belongings—everything, wh
[MSG10 30] Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, “You’ve made my name repulsive to the people here, these Canaanites and Perizzites. If they decided to gang up on us and attack, as few as we are we wouldn’t stand a chance; they’d wipe me and my people right off the map.”
[MSG11 31] They said, “Nobody is going to treat our sister like a whore and get by with it.”